
The capacity crowd in the London Stadium was still digesting the shock earlier defeat for home hero Mo Farah in the men's 5,000m final, before the drama of Bolt's last agonizing appearance.
READ: Bolt in numbers - Why the Jamaican is the greatest
READ: Gatlin spoils Bolt's individual farewell
He had been bidding for a 12th world championship gold to bring down the curtain on his glittering career, but instead limped out of the London Stadium arena.
Victory for the British quartet of CJ Ujah, Adam Gemili, who ran a storming second leg, Daniel Talbot and Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake was stunning compensation for Farah's earlier defeat.
They won in 37.47 seconds, with the US taking silver at 0.05sec and Japan with a surprise bronze.Jamaica's 110m hurdles champion Omar McLeod, who ran the first leg for the quartet, summed up the feeling of everyone.
"Usain Bolt's name will always live on," he said.
But another teammate, Yohan Blake, who won Olympic relay gold with Bolt in 2012 and 2016, slammed organizers for the delay in starting the race because of medal ceremonies.
"Usain was really cold. In fact Usain said to me, 'Yohan, I think this is crazy'," he said.
Farah bows out with silver
Farah, who won the 10,000 title in dramatic fashion of the opening day at the London Stadium, had to settle for silver behind Ethiopian Muktar Edris in his final championship race on the track.
He edged out American Paul Chelimo in a desperate dash for the line, the last mile of a hitherto slow run race run in just under four minutes.
Farah, 34, will now turn his attention to the marathon after failing in his bid to double up at the Olympics or World Championship for the fifth time, including double gold in London 2012 and the Rio Games last year.
Britain's Mo Farah slumps to the track in disappointment after failing in his bid for gold in the 5,000m at the world athletics championship in London.
Edris, a former world junior champion, timed his last lap burst to perfection to win in 13 minutes 32.79 seconds, copying Farah's famous Mobot gesture as he crossed the line.
It was not the farewell Farah wanted, but he pointed to his earlier exertions in a dramatic 10,000m final as reason for lacking his usual devastating finish.
"The 10,000m took a lot more out of me than I had realized," he told BBC Sport.
"I gave it my all. I didn't have a single thing left to give 